## Contents of the Repository
  - README.md -- Serves as an orientation to everyone who comes to this repository, it should enable you to get their bearings. You are in the README.md file now.
  - LICENSE.md -- The terms under which they may use and cite your repository.
  - SCRIPTS folder -- Contains all the source code for the project. See section 1 of this file for more information.
  - DATA folder --  Contains all of the data for this project. Includes 9 .csv files for each of Swift's published albums. Includes taylor_swift.csv, a file that caontains all the raw data that has been processed through the sentiment analysis software. Includes sentiment analysis results for each song line. Also includes a data appendix with more information on each file.
  - OUTPUT folder -- contains all of the output generated by our  project, e.g. figures, tables, etc.

## Section 1: Software and Platform Section
    Python was used to complete sentiment analysis for this project. The VADER software package was
    used in this analysis. VADER (Valence Aware Dictionary and sEntiment Reasoner) is a software 
    package used for sentiment analysis of text. It is specifically designed to analyze the 
    sentiment of text data in a way that is aware of the valence, or emotional intensity, of words.
    VADER created three scores for each lyric line: positive, negative, and neutral. The team will 
    find the VADER score for each line, average the score from each song into their corresponding 
    album. Each album will be assigned a VADER score (based on how positive the song will be). Song 
    scores will be graphed, comparing each one to one another. The script was created in the 
    IDE Visual Studio Code. To create the graphs, RStudio was used along with the tidyverse, dplyr, 
    ggplot2, and kableExtra libraries. Windows 11 was the platform used to complete this analysis.

## Section 2: A Map of your documentation. 

- DATA
  - 01-taylor_swift.csv
  - 02-fearless_taylors_version.csv
  - 03-speak_now_deluxe_package.csv
  - 04-red_deluxe_edition.csv
  - 05-1989_deluxe.csv
  - 06-reputation.csv
  - 07-lover.csv
  - 08-folklore_deluxe_version.csv
  - 09-evermore_deluxe_version.csv
  - Data Appendix.pdf
  - taylor_swift.csv 
- OUTPUT
  - Output.pdf
- SCRIPTS
  - taylorswift.py
  - TaylorSwift.Rmd
- LICENSE.md
- README.md


## Section 3: Steps the group used and the instructions for reproducing the results: 
1. Gather Raw Data – We secured a complete dataset of Swift’s lyrics, separated line-by-line, in Kaggle called "Taylor Swift Song Lyrics (All Albums)" [1] which we placed in the DATA folder.
2. Set up the VADER program – Using Vadersentiment documentation [2] as a model, we set up the VADER package in python to complete the initial analysis of the data. Install python if needed using online instructions.
3. Create Final Data CSV - create a csv called "taylor_swift.csv" in the same destination folder as the downloaded intial data.
4. Run the taylorswift.py Script - Use this script to run the VADER program on each line for each album to determine a negativity score, positivity score, neutral score, and overall score and write all initial and new data into the "taylor_swift.csv" file to create the final data set.
5. Prepare RStudio - Using the TaylorSwift.Rmd script, open it in RStudio and make sure you have the necessary packages/libraries installed. Install them if necessary.
6. Create Graphs and Tables - Run the TaylorSwift.Rmd script to create descriptive tables and graphs as well as sentiment score analysis.
7. Analyze Results - Use data, tables, and graphs to compare sentiment scores across Swift's albums to understand the trend of her music. 

### References
[1]	“Taylor Swift Song Lyrics (All Albums)”, Kaggle, 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thespacefreak/taylor-swift-song-lyrics-all-albums?resou
rce=download [Accessed Feb. 8 2024].

[2]	“Welcome to Vadersentiment’s documentation!,” Welcome to VaderSentiment’s 
documentation! - VaderSentiment 3.3.1 documentation, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://vadersentiment.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ [Accessed Feb. 1, 2024].



